Create read replicas docs (#2193)
timescale/docs: cloud/service-operations/read-scaling.md

---

> title: Backup and restore
> excerpt: Understand how backups and restores work in Timescale Cloud
> product: cloud
> keywords: [backups, restore]
> tags: [recovery, failures]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Read scaling
excerpt: Understand how read scaling works in Timescale Cloud
product: cloud
keywords: [replicas, scaling]
tags: [replicas, scaling, ha]
```

---

# Read scaling

> Read replicas are read-only copies of a database that allow you to scale
> beyond the limits of your service safely. You can create as many read

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read replicas are read-only copies of a database that allow you to safely
scale beyond the limits of your service. You can create as many read
```

replicas as you need. Read replicas can power your read-intensive

> application, BI tool, or both. Each read replica will appear as its own

Reviewer: ```suggestion
application, business intelligence tool, or both. Each read replica appears as its own
```

> service and have a unique address (connection string) that is different
> from the parent and any HA replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
service. The replica uses a unique connection string that is different
from the parent and any HA replicas.
```

Queries on read replicas have minimal impact on the performance of the

> parent (primary) service, making them ideal for creating isolated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parent, or primary, service, making them ideal for creating isolated
```

> instances with up-to-date production data for analyses or scaling out

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instances with up-to-date production data for analysis or scaling out
```

reads.

## Analytics
Read replicas can create an isolated environment for a business analyst
to run heavy analytical queries, rather than running them on a
production instance, and risk impacting performance. The read replica

> can be short-lived and deleted once the analysis is complete or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be short-lived and deleted when the analysis is complete, or
```

long-running to power a business intelligence (BI) tool. 

> When creating a read replica for analytics, it is recommended to also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating a read replica for analytics, it is recommended that you also
```

create a new read-only user for the person using the replica. Users must

> be created in the primary and are then propagated to the read replica.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be created on the primary, they are then propagated to the read replica.
```

Read replicas are read-only and have their own connection string. Since
credentials are the same for both, having a read-only user creates an

> additional layer of safety in case the wrong connection string is
> accidentally used to connect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
additional layer of safety in case you accidentally use the 
wrong connection string to connect.
```

> Read replicas can also be a different configuration than the primary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read replicas can also have a different configuration to the primary.
```

> Analytics environments may benefit from higher CPU for heavy queries or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Analytics environments can benefit from higher CPU for heavy queries, or
```

lower CPU to power long-running dashboards to save on costs.

> ## Read scaling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Read replicas

```

Read replicas can be used to serve reads for an application. This

> removes load from the primary, allowing the primary to improve ingest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
removes load from the primary, and allows the primary to improve ingest
```

> performance. Doing so may be particularly useful in environments where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
performance. Doing this can be particularly useful in environments where
```

> read traffic is very spiky (and risks impacting ingest performance) or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
read traffic is very spiky and risks impacting ingest performance, or
```

where reads should always be lower priority than writes.

One consideration for using this approach is that read replicas use

> asynchronous replication and thus may slightly lag the parent service,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
asynchronous replication. This can cause slight lag on the parent service,
```

which is acceptable in certain circumstances. Allowable lag can be
reduced significantly by adjusting the `max_standby_streaming_delay`,

> and `max_standby_archive_delay` parameters. That said, it would not be
> recommended to use this approach where changes must be immediately

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and `max_standby_archive_delay` parameters. That said, it is not
recommended that you use this approach where changes must be immediately
```

> represented, e.g., for user credentials. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
represented, such as for user credentials. 
```

## Create a read replica

<Procedure>

### Creating a read replica

1.  [Log in to your Timescale Cloud account][cloud-login] and click
  the service you want to replicate.
1.  Navigate to the `Operations` tab, and select `Read scaling`.
1.  Click `Add read replica`. Select the configuration you want for
your read replica and click `Add read replica`.
1.  You can see the read replicas for each service by clicking on the
service name, navigating to the `Operations` tab, and selecting `Read
scaling`. Read replicas are also shown in the main `Services` section.

> 1.  You can see connection information for the read replica like you
> would a normal service. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  You can see connection information for the read replica 
     in the same way as a regular service. 
```

</Procedure>

> ## HA replicas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## High availability replicas

```

HA replicas automatically come with a read-only endpoint that can be
used to serve read queries. Queries against this endpoint can impact the

> performance of the primary, unlike read replicas. Primaries will hold

Reviewer: ```suggestion
performance of the primary, unlike read replicas. Primaries hold
```

any WAL that would impact a query currently being executed on an HA
replica, potentially causing performance degradation. By default, the
query timeout on HA replicas is low (30s), which can help mitigate this
risk. This approach is likely allowable for simple read queries, but
heavier read queries risk timing out or causing performance degradation
on the primary. For more information, see the [high availability][ha]

> docs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
section.
```
